Pull some H2 content into the introduction (#2683)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-http.md

HTTP semantics are used for a broad range of services on the Internet. These
semantics have commonly been used with two different TCP mappings, HTTP/1.1 and
HTTP/2.  HTTP/3 supports the same semantics over a new transport protocol, QUIC.

## Prior versions of HTTP

> HTTP/1.1 was a TCP mapping which used whitespace-delimited text fields to convey

Reviewer: Past tense may not be appropriate as it is still in active use in a few places.

HTTP messages.  While these exchanges were human-readable, the whitespace led to
parsing difficulties and workarounds to be tolerant of variant behavior.
Because each connection could be used only for a single HTTP request and

> response at a time, multiple parallel TCP connections were used, reducing the

Reviewer: That is not true. Pipelining is a thing.

Reviewer: I'm doing that, processing multiple requests concurrently on different backends and streaming the responses back in order.

ability of the congestion controller to accurately manage traffic between
endpoints.

HTTP/2 introduced a binary framing and multiplexing layer to improve latency
without modifying the transport layer.  However, because the parallel nature
of HTTP/2's multiplexing was not visible to TCP's loss recovery mechanisms,
a lost or reordered packet caused all active transactions to experience a stall
regardless of whether that transaction was impacted by the lost packet.

## Delegation to QUIC

The QUIC transport protocol incorporates stream multiplexing and per-stream flow
control, similar to that provided by the HTTP/2 framing layer. By providing
reliability at the stream level and congestion control across the entire
connection, it has the capability to improve the performance of HTTP compared to
a TCP mapping.  QUIC also incorporates TLS 1.3 at the transport layer, offering
comparable security to running TLS over TCP, with the improved connection setup
latency of TCP Fast Open {{?RFC7413}}}.

This document defines a mapping of HTTP semantics over the QUIC transport
protocol, drawing heavily on the design of HTTP/2.  While delegating stream

> management and flow control issues to QUIC, a similar binary framing is used on

Reviewer 2: what does the term stream management mean in this case? In some perspectives, QUIC doesn't manage much other than ensuring the stream arrives and is presented in-order at the other end (as explained elsewhere in this doc).

each stream. Some HTTP/2 features are subsumed by QUIC, while other features are
implemented atop QUIC.

QUIC is described in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.  For a full description of HTTP/2, see
{{!HTTP2=RFC7540}}.

# HTTP/3 Protocol Overview

HTTP/3 provides a transport for HTTP semantics using the QUIC transport protocol
and an internal framing layer similar to HTTP/2.

> An HTTP/3 endpoint is discovered using HTTP Alternative Services.  Once a client

Reviewer: Can be

knows that an HTTP/3 server exists at a certain endpoint, it opens a QUIC
connection. QUIC provides protocol negotiation, stream-based multiplexing, and
flow control.

Within each stream, the basic unit of HTTP/3 communication is a frame
({{frames}}).  Each frame type serves a different purpose.  For example, HEADERS

> and DATA frames form the frames form the basis of HTTP requests and responses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and DATA frames form the basis of HTTP requests and responses
```

({{request-response}}).  Other frame types like SETTINGS, PRIORITY, and GOAWAY
are used to managed the overall connection.

Multiplexing of requests is performed using the QUIC stream abstraction, with
each request and response consuming a single QUIC stream.  Streams are largely
independent of each other, so one stream that is blocked or suffers packet loss

> does not prevent progress on other streams.

Reviewer: But progress of other streams can when flow credits are exhausted.

Author: Doesn't exhausted flow control credits fall under "is blocked"?

QPACK [QPACK].  QPACK uses separate unidirectional streams to modify and track
header table state, while header blocks refer to the state of the table without
modifying it.

## Document Organization

The HTTP/3 specification is split into seven parts:

- Connection Setup and Management ({{connection-setup}}) covers how an HTTP/3
  endpoint is discovered and a connection is established.
- Stream Mapping and Usage ({{stream-mapping}}) describes the way QUIC streams
  are used.
- HTTP Framing Layer ({{http-framing-layer}}) describes the frames used on
  most streams.
- HTTP Request Lifecycle ({{http-request-lifecycle}}) describes how HTTP
  semantics are expressed using frames.
- Connection Closure ({{connection-closure}}) describes how connections are
  terminated, either gracefully or abruptly.
- Extensions to HTTP/3 ({{extensions}}) describes how new capabilities can be
  added in future documents.
- Error Handling ({{errors}}) describes how error conditions are handled and
  expressed, either on a particular stream or for the connection as a whole.

Readers familiar with HTTP/2 will find a more detailed comparison with that

> protocol in {{h2-considerations}}.

Reviewer: With that protocol? HTTP/1.1?

Reviewer 3: @mikkelfj : I suspect you're missing that comparison "of HTTP/3" is assumed (which is reasonable, IMO)

Reviewer: Well, understand the text, but it reads as if was written immediately after the first paragraph and then a lot of text was thrown in, end then "that protocol" stands dangling becuse it might mean either HTTP/1.1 or QUIC until you realize it cannot mean QUIC since QUIC didn't exist when HTTP/2 was written. So I merely suggest typing out HTTP/1.1 explicitly.

Also, my feedback have come across a bit grumpy, that was not the intention. I really do appreciate the extra clarifying text on this topic.

Reviewer: Actually I am missing that. I was assuming HTTP/1.1 but now it is HTTP/3. So yes, I think a clarification is needed.

HTTP semantics are used for a broad range of services on the Internet. These
semantics have commonly been used with two different TCP mappings, HTTP/1.1 and
HTTP/2.  HTTP/3 supports the same semantics over a new transport protocol, QUIC.

## Prior versions of HTTP

HTTP/1.1 is a TCP mapping which uses whitespace-delimited text fields to convey

> HTTP messages.  While these exchanges are human-readable, the whitespace leads

Reviewer 4: It isn't just the whitespace, but the use of whitespace for delineation makes some aspects of parsing and processing difficult.  You should be careful not to talk about shortcomings that this version doesn't address.

Reviewer: Agree with @martinthomson 
Technically, whitespace is very easy to parse, and can be more efficient than variable length encoded frames. The real problem is the vague definition of what constitutes whitespace, when and where to expect it, and the different kinds of whitespace in existence. JSON has no such issues with whitespace.

to parsing difficulties and workarounds to be tolerant of variant behavior.
Because each connection can transfer only a single HTTP request or response at a

> time in each direction, multiple parallel TCP connections are used, reducing the

Reviewer 4: "are used" or "are often used"

ability of the congestion controller to accurately manage traffic between

> endpoints.

Reviewer 4: Only because people haven't worked out how to run the same congestion controller for multiple connections.  I mean, there is no reason you can't do that... in theory.

Author: I heard that proposal again in Prague, as a matter of fact.  I wish them all success.

reliability at the stream level and congestion control across the entire
connection, it has the capability to improve the performance of HTTP compared to
a TCP mapping.  QUIC also incorporates TLS 1.3 at the transport layer, offering
comparable security to running TLS over TCP, with the improved connection setup
latency of TCP Fast Open {{?RFC7413}}}.

This document defines a mapping of HTTP semantics over the QUIC transport
protocol, drawing heavily on the design of HTTP/2.  While delegating stream
lifetime and flow control issues to QUIC, a similar binary framing is used on
each stream. Some HTTP/2 features are subsumed by QUIC, while other features are
implemented atop QUIC.

QUIC is described in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.  For a full description of HTTP/2, see
{{!HTTP2=RFC7540}}.

# HTTP/3 Protocol Overview

HTTP/3 provides a transport for HTTP semantics using the QUIC transport protocol
and an internal framing layer similar to HTTP/2.

An HTTP/3 endpoint can be discovered using HTTP Alternative Services; this
process is described in greater detail in {{discovery}}.  Once a client knows
that an HTTP/3 server exists at a certain endpoint, it opens a QUIC connection.

> QUIC provides protocol negotiation, stream-based multiplexing, and flow control.

Reviewer 4: I'd invert this paragraph.  The key points are in the second sentence.  The alternative services thing is really secondary here.

This document uses the variable-length integer encoding from
{{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

The following terms are used:

abort:
: An abrupt termination of a connection or stream, possibly due to an error
  condition.

client:
: The endpoint that initiates an HTTP/3 connection.  Clients send HTTP requests
  and receive HTTP responses.

connection:
: A transport-layer connection between two endpoints, using QUIC as the
  transport protocol.

connection error:
: An error that affects the entire HTTP/3 connection.

endpoint:
: Either the client or server of the connection.

frame:

> : The smallest unit of communication within an HTTP/3 connection, consisting of

Reviewer 2: I know this comes from HTTP/2 but one could argue that frames are not the smallest unit in HTTP/3.

  a header and a variable-length sequence of octets structured according to the

>   frame type.

Reviewer: It may be worth noting that frames can span mutiple packets unlike QUIC frames.

Author: That's a good suggestion, but I'm not sure I want to overload what is essentially a glossary with that.  I'll add that to the description of frames in general.

  Protocol elements called "frames" exist in both this document and
  {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. Where frames from {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} are referenced, the
  frame name will be prefaced with "QUIC."  For example, "QUIC CONNECTION_CLOSE
  frames."  References without this preface refer to frames defined in
  {{frames}}.

peer:
: An endpoint.  When discussing a particular endpoint, "peer" refers to the
  endpoint that is remote to the primary subject of discussion.

receiver:
: An endpoint that is receiving frames.

sender:
: An endpoint that is transmitting frames.

> server:

Reviewer 2: disagree, the order is lexical and mirrors the ordering of terms in RFC 7540

This document uses the variable-length integer encoding from
{{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

The following terms are used:

abort:
: An abrupt termination of a connection or stream, possibly due to an error
  condition.

client:
: The endpoint that initiates an HTTP/3 connection.  Clients send HTTP requests
  and receive HTTP responses.

connection:
: A transport-layer connection between two endpoints, using QUIC as the
  transport protocol.

connection error:
: An error that affects the entire HTTP/3 connection.

endpoint:

> : Either the client or server of the connection.

Reviewer 4: Love the circular definition here.

Author: Everyone loves [their own baby](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7540#section-2.2). 😉

## HTTP Message Exchanges {#request-response}

A client sends an HTTP request on a client-initiated bidirectional QUIC stream.
A client MUST send only a single request on a given stream. A server sends zero
or more non-final HTTP responses on the same stream as the request, followed by

> a single final HTTP response, as detailed below.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

--- back

# Considerations for Transitioning from HTTP/2 {#h2-considerations}

HTTP/3 is strongly informed by HTTP/2, and bears many similarities.  This

> section describes the approach taken to design HTTP/3, points out important

Reviewer 5: Below "HTTP/3 departs from HTTP/2 primarily where necessary to
accommodate the differences in behavior between QUIC and TCP (lack of ordering,	accommodate the 
support for streams)."

I'd tweak this to be more along the lines of "We changed it when we thought a new design was better, with particular focus on taking advantage of QUIC's lack of head of line blocking" to reflect the state we're in today.  Don't take my suggestion verbatim, but I think that's the concept?

Reviewer 2: Based on the evidence, the design changes seem to be motivated because we lost something we had, not because we are taking advantage of some new ability.

Author: We've gotten a little stretchy in places, but we've been explicitly trying to stay out of the "improve on HTTP/2 in ways unrelated to QUIC" game.  (Some fixes to the more egregious gaps in prioritization are the primary exception.)  I'm trying to reflect that aspiration, though you're correct that we might want to reflect the stretchiness a bit as well.

Reviewer 3: How about "HTTP/3 departs from HTTP/2 where QUIC's behavior differences from TCP are either beneficial or need to be accommodated (absence of linear ordering, support for framing)."

--- back

# Considerations for Transitioning from HTTP/2 {#h2-considerations}

HTTP/3 is strongly informed by HTTP/2, and bears many similarities.  This
section describes the approach taken to design HTTP/3, points out important
differences from HTTP/2, and describes how to map HTTP/2 extensions into HTTP/3.

HTTP/3 begins from the premise that similarity to HTTP/2 is preferable, but not
a hard requirement.  HTTP/3 departs from HTTP/2 where QUIC's behavior

> differences from TCP (lack of ordering, support for streams) are either

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
where QUIC differs from TCP, either to take advantage of QUIC features (like streams) or to accommodate important shortcomings (such as a lack of total ordering).
```

beneficial or need to be accommodated.  HTTP/3 attempts to avoid gratuitous
changes which make it difficult or impossible to build extensions with the same

> semantics applicable to both protocols at once.

Reviewer 4: I think that we can lose this sentence now.  It might be time to face up to reality:

> These differences make HTTP/3 similar to HTTP/2 in key aspects, such as the relationship of requests and responses to streams.  However, the details of the HTTP/3 design are substantially different than HTTP/2.

not required.  This permits the removal of the Flags field from the generic
frame layout.

> Frame payloads are largely drawn from {{!HTTP2}}. However, QUIC includes many

Author: I'd prefer to handle that separately, since that's distinct from what I'm doing here and potentially sizable.  I've opened #2698 with a first pass at that change.
